*Notes 2019-10-21*

MT3: based on problem set 4 and 5

**lemma**: let $p, q$ be primes. Let $\alpha > 0, \alpha \in \mathbb Z$ s.t. $q^\alpha | p - 1$. There exist exactly $q^\alpha - q^{\alpha - 1}$ residue classes of integers $x$ s.t. $\text{ord}_p(x) = q^\alpha$.

**Goal**: $\exists x \in \mathbb Z$ s.t. $\text{ord}_p(x) = p - 1$, therefore $x^{p-1} \equiv 1 \pmod p$.

**Proof**: we proved $\forall d | p-1$, $\exists$ precisely $d$ solutions to $x^d \equiv 1 \pmod p$, but we don't know that $d$ is minimal. Clearly, if $\text{ord}_p(x) = q^\alpha$, then $x^{q^\alpha} \equiv 1 \pmod p$ we know that there are $q^\alpha$ solutions to the equation $x^{q^\alpha} \equiv 1 \pmod p$.

Two groups: 

$(i)$: $N =$ number of solutions of order $q^\alpha$

$(ii)$: $M$ is number of solutions of order $< q^\alpha$.

We know $N + M = q^\alpha$. So what's $M$?

We know of solutions $x$ of the $M$ sort that $\text{ord}_p(x) | q^\alpha$ and $\text{ord}_p(x) \not = q^\alpha$ so $\text{ord}_p(x) = q^\beta$, $\beta < \alpha$.

$\beta < \alpha \Leftrightarrow \beta \leq \alpha - 1$. So $\text{ord}_p(x) = q^\beta | q^{\alpha-1}$

$\Rightarrow x^{q^{\alpha - 1}} \equiv 1 \pmod p$

we know therefore that $M = q^{\alpha-1}$ (because $q^{\alpha - 1} | p)$, so $N+M = q^{\alpha}$ therefore $N = q^{\alpha} - q^{\alpha - 1}$.


**Definition**: let $m \in \mathbb N$, $a \in \mathbb Z$. If $\text{ord}_m(a) = \phi(m)$ then $a$ is called a *primitive* elt. modulo $m$.

Can we prove that there always exist primitive elements? No. For example, $n \geq 3, m = 2^n$, then no primitive elements exist. 

If $|(\mathbb Z / m\mathbb Z)^*|$ is an odd prime power, then $\exists$ a primitive element.

**Theorem**: $\exists$ $\phi(p-1)$ residue classes of integers $x$ modulo the prime $p$ s.t. $\text{ord}_p(x) = p-1$.

**Proof**: we first prove there exists one primitive root. Let $p-1 = \prod_{i=1}^k q_i^{\alpha_i}$. Then we know $\forall i \in \{1,\ldots k\}, \exists x_i$ s.t. $\text{ord}_P (x_i) = q^{\alpha_i}$. Since $\gcd(q_i^{\alpha_i}, q_j^{\alpha_j})_{i \not = j} = 1$, then $\text{ord}_p(x_j, x_j) = q_i^{\alpha_i}q_j^{\alpha_j}$. So $\text{ord}_p \prod_{i=1}^k x_i = \prod_{i=1}^k q_i^{\alpha_i} = p-1$

So, $\text{ord}_p (\prod_{i=1}^k x_i) = \prod_{i=1}^k(q_i^{\alpha_i}) = p - 1$

We know $\exists g$ s.t. $\text{ord}_p(z) = p-1 = \phi(p) = |\mathbb Z/p\mathbb Z|$ so $\{1,q,\ldots q^{p-2}\} = \{1, 2, \ldots p-1\}$ (though not necessarily in that order). If $g^{i} \equiv g^j_{j\not = i} \pmod P$ then $p|q^i(q^{j-1} - 1)$, $p\not | g$ and $p\not p + g^{j-1} - 1$. Contradiction.

$x^n \equiv a \pmod P$

$\equiv g^{in} \equiv g^{j} \pmod P$

$\Leftrightarrow i\cdot n \equiv j (\pmod p - 1)$ (converting $*$ to $+$)

So the quesiton is, for what $i \in \{0,\ldots p-2\} g'$ is a primitive root modulo $P$.

**Goal**: $P - 1 = \text{ord}(g^i) = \frac{\text{ord}_P(g)}{\gcd(i, \text{ord}_p(g))} = \frac{p - 1}{\gcd(1, p-1)}$

$\Leftrightarrow \gcd(i, p-1) = 1 \Rightarrow \phi(p-1)$ residue classes of integers $x$ s.t. $\text{ord}_p(x) \equiv p - 1$

$g^1$ and $g^{p-2} \equiv g^{-1}$

$|(\mathbf Z / m \mathbf Z)^*| = \phi(m)$
