*Notes 2019-10-08*

**Goal**: Understand $f(x)\equiv 0 \pmod P$

where $f(x)$ is a polynomial with integer coefficients and $P$ is a prime.

In particular, we wish to understand $x^n - a \equiv 0 \pmod P$. A significant portion of the remainder of the course will be dedicated to this.

**Strategy**: There are two big reductions that can be applied to this problem (when $a=0$). 

$(1)$ It sufficies to consider the case when $\deg(f) \leq P - 1$ (due to Fermat's Little Theorem)

\begin{align*}
f(x) \equiv& 0 \pmod P\\
x^P - x &\equiv 0 \pmod P\\
x^{P-1} &\equiv 1 \pmod P \text{if $P \not |\; x$}
\end{align*}

Now, $f(x) = (x^P - x) Q(x) + R(x); Q, R\in \mathbb Z[X]$ and $\deg R \leq P - 1$, so if $f(x)\equiv 0 \pmod p \Leftrightarrow (x^P - x)Q(X) + R(x) \equiv 0 \pmod p$ and so $f(x) \equiv 0 \pmod P \Leftrightarrow R(x) \equiv 0 \pmod P (\deg R \leq P - 1)$

$(2)$ It suffices to solve the polynomial congruences where the polynomial is monic. $g(x) \equiv 0 \pmod p, g(x) = c_dx^d + \ldots c_0$

*Ex*: $14x^6 - 21x^4 + 11x^3 - 3x^2 + 7x - 0 \equiv 0 \pmod 7 \rightarrow 0 + 0 + 4x^3 - 3x^2 + 0 - 2\equiv 0\pmod 7$

Multiply by inverse of $4$, namely $2$:

\begin{align*}
8x^3 - 6x^2 - 4 &\equiv 0 \pmod 7\\
1x^3 + x^2 - 4 &\equiv 0 \pmod 7
\end{align*}

Ket $k \leq d$ be the largext index s.t. $P \not |\; C_k$ (i.e. $P|C_\ell$ if $\ell > k$), then

$$c_dx^d + \ldots c_0 \equiv 0 \pmod P \Leftrightarrow$$
$b \cdot( c_k x^k + \ldots c_0 \equiv 0 )$$

where $b c_k \equiv 1 \pmod P$

**Proposition**: (This is trivial with knowledge of fields) Let $f\in \mathbb Z[X]$ be a monic polynomial of degree $d$. Then there are at most $d$ solutions for the congruence $f(x) \equiv 0 \pmod P$ (where $P$ is a prime). (Note: this is because $\mathbb Z / p\mathbb Z$ is a field)

*Proof*: Induction on $d$. Base case is $d=1$, in which case we have the linear monic polynomial, i.e. $f(x) := x + c_0 \equiv 0 \pmod p$ has a unique solution ($x = \bar 0)$.

Inductive step: Assume the statement is true for $d - 1$ and below. If there are no solutions to $f(x) \equiv 0 \pmod P$ then we win! $0 < d$.

So, assume there is at least one solution $x_0 \in \mathbb Z$ s.t. $f(x_0) \equiv 0 \pmod p$. Then $(x - x_0)$ is a factor of $f(x)$; in other words, $f(x) = (x - x_0) g(x)$. Then $f(x) = (x-x_0)Q(x) + R(x)$ where $Q, R\in\mathbb Z[x]$ and $\deg R < 1$. So $R(x) := r\in\mathbb Z$ (it's a constant). Thus we have:
$$f(x) = (x-x_0) Q(x) + r$$
$$f(x_0) = r \equiv 0 \pmod p$$
So, pick another solution $x_1$ to $f(x) \equiv 0$ where $x_1 \not = x_0 \pmod p$.

Then $f(x_1) \equiv (x_1 - x_0) Q(x_1) + r \equiv 0 \pmod p$. We know $r \equiv 0 \pmod P \Rightarrow (x_1 - x_0) Q(x_1) \equiv 0 \pmod P \Rightarrow Q(x_1) \equiv 0 \pmod P$ and $\deg Q = d-1$ and $Q$ is also monic (since $f(x) = (x-x_0)Q(x) + r$, where $f(x)$ is monic and $(x-x0)$ is a monic polynomial as well). By induction, there are at most $d-1$ solutions to $Q(x) \pmod P$, and hence there are at most $d$ solutions to $f(x) = (x_1 - x_0)Q(x_1)$ including $x_0$ as well. \qedhere

**Example**: $$x^9 + 10x^6 + 2x^5 + 6x^3 - x + 3 \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

$$x^7 - x \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

$$x^7 \pmod x \pmod 7$$

$$x^8 \equiv x^2 \pmod 7$$

$$x^9 \equiv x^3 \pmod 7$$

So we get $$x^3 + 3x^6 + 2x^5 + 6x^3 - x - x + 3 \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

and hence $$3x^6 + 2x^5 - x + 3 \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

Now, notice that $x^6 \equiv 1 \pmod 7$ if $7 \not | x$. However, $0$ is clearly not a solution. So $3x^6 \rightarrow 3$.

Our polynomial is now:

$$2x^5 - x + 6 \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

$$2x^5 - x -1 \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

Now we see that $1$ is a solution. Unfortunately, factoring out $(x - 1)$ doesn't help; the result is ugly.

$$(x-1)(2x^4 + 2x^3 + 2x^2 + 1) \equiv 0 \pmod 7$$

Instead, however, we can multiply by $x$ to get 

\begin{align*}
2x^6 - x^2 -x &\equiv 0 \pmod 7\\
x^2 + x - 2&\equiv 0 \pmod 7\\
(x+2)(x-1)&\equiv 0 \pmod 7
\end{align*}
